When launching an experiment,
it is important that tracking is in place so you can determine if the results of
the experiment show that the test state is
causing users to act differently than the control state.
When considering how to instrument,
to track user actions during testing,
most of the same metrics covered in our earlier lessons on
KPIs and usage analysis will apply.
To start, it is always helpful to track
user actions on an experiment page to know what they did when starting,
during, and ending their interaction with the experiment page or feature.
For example, if there are buttons that a user
can click on a page that is part of an experiment,
it would be important to track if and when a user
click those buttons if that wasn't already being tracked.
You will also want to know how much time a user spends on the experiment page,
perhaps measured by tracking user entry to the page and the time of user exit.
In addition to user actions,
it is always helpful to collect information that
might vary about a user from visit to visit.
For example, a user's Id, gender,
and any demographic information they provided probably won't change.
But the device they are using or the app version they are on might change.
After launching the experiment,
you might want to consider differences in performance across session variables like this.
So it is important the instrument to collect this information.
Some instrumentation that needs to be in place for experiments is
different than that normally considered in feature and funnel analysis.
Product managers do not always run experiments on all users,
but might focus on a particular type of user.
For example, the user they've identified as under
converting in the data.This means you need to
instrument and collect information on the right type of
users and ensure that they are part of the experiment.
For example, product managers often want to run experiments on first-time users.
If first-time users are signing up for an account,
then product managers can assign users to a test state as they complete registration.
That way, no existing customers will be part of the test.
But what if users don't have to make accounts such as shoppers on an e-commerce site.
Then product managers need to find some way to identify a person as a returning user.
Using current technologies, this might mean dropping a cookie so that you
can see if a user has a cookie that shows they've already visited your page.
Finally, it is vitally important to track which test state a user is assigned.
Of course, this is necessary to be able to
analyze the difference in results between experiment groups.
But it is also important so you can consistently show the same test state to
the same user by tracking which test state a user was shown as part of the experiment,
you can be sure to always show them only that test state and tell the experiment is over.
The final and perhaps most important thing to track during an experiment is
what percent of users in each experiment group successfully perform the desired action.
This is called the conversion rate.
A conversion rate measures the percent of users
who take the action you want your experiment to promote.
This might be a behavior you encourage users to take,
such as opening your app or using a new feature.
Ideally, you can track the experiment results and
see that key performance indicators are being raised by the experiment,
such as an increase in customer satisfaction rating by those who use the feature.
The conversion you're targeting can also be something you want a user to stop doing.
For example, you might want to measure the percent of users who cancel an order.
Another common experiment conversion,
is the percent of users who make a purchase or spend a certain amount of money.
The key to choosing the correct conversion rate to measure is choosing one that
relates to the important long-term impact you wish your experiment to drive.
This may often be a product or feature key performance indicator.
Let's look at the example of an online store.
A product manager wants to carry out an AB experiment that compares the impact of
the color of the newsletter readership button being blue to the impact of it being read.
Now let's consider what conversion rate to track in this experiment.
We know that the number of purchases is an important key performance indicator.
Perhaps the product manager doing the experiment has seen that readers of
the newsletter are more likely to come back to the site and make additional purchases.
The percentage of users who read the newsletter using the blue button
and the percentage of users who read the newsletter using the red button,
can be a good conversion to look at.
As a product manager with established KPIs,
especially when following a data-driven iterative cycle of design,
the target conversion rate you want to track for
an experiment may often be a feature or product level KPI.